Welcome... to another episode of Shiloh Creek....Where the water runs slow, the friends look out for each other, and every story starts here — pondside — with me.
I'm Old Tim-Ber....The elephant elder....And today's story... is about the morning a small, fast, very cross visitor turned up at the meadow....And what happened... when one of the friends...tried a soft answer.
Today... I want to ask you something, my friends....Have you ever had somebody...come at you fast,...with grievous words,...before you even knew what was happening?...What does it mean...to answer somebody...softly?...When everything in you...wants to answer LOUD?...Listen carefully....The answer is in the story.
And here is one thing for you to know... before we start....God made each of us...with different speeds...and different feelings...and different ways of saying...what we mean....And sometimes...when somebody comes at you fast,...the kindest thing you can do for them...is be slow.
Now... gather round. Come close by the pond.
...BEHOLD!...Old Tim-Ber!...Is THIS — is this the one...where the chitter-stranger arrives?
Mm....Yes, Gah-ring-goh....It is the chitter-stranger one....And the soft-answer one....Settle in.
Now... settle in....Here we go.
Now, this was a soft yellow morning,...the kind that comes after a quiet warm night,...where the meadow smells of wet grass and slow honeysuckle...and the air feels like somebody had laid a warm blanket on it...and then forgotten to come back for it.
And the friends had been planning,...for that very morning,...something quite small....They were going to lay out a long row of acorns...for Shelly to count...because Shelly liked counting acorns...and Zippy had calculated...that the meadow,...this season,...had the highest acorn-per-square-foot count...in five years.
Now, an acorn-counting morning,...if you have never had one,...is the kind of morning...where the loudest thing supposed to happen...is a small wooden tap...as Shelly...moves another acorn...into the counted pile.
...Mm.....That's the morning I was promised.
Except — that quiet acorn-counting morning,...as it turned out,...was about to receive...a visitor....A small fast brown visitor....Who had,...we would learn,...quite a lot to say.
Now, this is where things got interesting...
And so the friends were laying out the row of acorns....Shelly had moved three....Zippy was perched on a stem,...wing-buzzing the count....Fern was on the soft side of the row,...sorting the small from the smaller....Bongo was sitting,...with his big bear-cub patience,...waiting for Shelly to be ready for an acorn-fetcher.
...Hmm.....That's strange....Down past the south side...there's a whole little drift...of BIG acorns....I'll come back to those...after I finish sorting.
And from up on his observing branch,...where he had been arranging his feathers...for what he called the morning-light angle,...Gah-ring-goh the parrot...was watching....He had not, at this exact moment,...announced anything....He was, by his own definition,...IN A STATE...OF READINESS.
And THEN —...from the south side of the meadow —...came a sound....A FAST sound....A small,...sharp,...skittery,...rapid,...high-pitched...arriving sound....Like somebody had set a tiny drum...on rapid....And the drum was,...as it turned out,...a chipmunk.
And the chipmunk arrived...right beside the acorn row....And he looked at the acorns....And he looked at Shelly....And he looked at the row....And then,...in the fastest possible voice,...he chittered out something...that sounded — and I will do my best chipmunk for you, my friends —...that sounded EXACTLY like this:...
MOVE — MOVE — these are MY acorns — you are on MY row — MOVE.
[excited]...Oh.....Hi....HI....Friend, my name is Bongo....I — I'm sorry — we didn't know they were YOUR acorns....We were going to —
But the chipmunk...did not...slow down....He chittered again,...faster,...sharper...
YOUR acorns? YOUR acorns? — that pile — over there — that's MINE — and you have the BIGGEST ones — you took the BIG ones — MOVE.
[excited] Okay — okay — wait — wait — friend chipmunk — we have NOT TOUCHED your acorns — these acorns are FROM the OAK on the EAST side of the meadow — your pile, by your DESCRIPTION, would be from the OAK on the SOUTH side — we have, in fact, a different acorn-source-vector — these are CLEARLY not the same acorns —
But the chipmunk —...who had not, as far as we could tell,...heard a single fact —...chittered RIGHT back...
oak — east — south — DON'T — I DON'T CARE — MOVE — your row is in my WAY — MOVE — your tortoise is too SLOW — MOVE the tortoise.
...The tortoise...has a NAME.....Friend.....The name is Shelly.
And from his observing branch —...where he had been watching all of this,...still IN A STATE OF READINESS —...Gah-ring-goh the parrot...puffed up his chest...the way a parrot puffs up his chest...when he is about to announce something he intends to make BIG.
...FRIENDS!...And SMALL fast STRANGER!...Now LISTEN HERE...you rude little —.....wait.....wait....wait....I — I was about to say...something LOUD.....Something BIG.....I had it...ARRANGED.
Mm.....And the loud thing in his throat...waited.
...Gah-ring-goh.....It's okay....Whatever you were going to say.....It's okay if it's smaller.
And so Gah-ring-goh —...with his chest still half-puffed,...with the announcement still warm in his throat,...with the chipmunk...still chittering little broken protests at his elbow —...took the kind of slow breath...a parrot takes...when he is choosing something he has never chosen before.
...Friend.....Small fast friend.....the loud thing in my throat...is...still THERE.....I can feel it.....But I am — I am going to put it down.....And try...a smaller one.....The meadow has plenty.....And we will help you find...your pile.
And the chipmunk....The fast chittery brown small chipmunk....Stopped.....For half a heartbeat.....And he LOOKED at Gah-ring-goh....And in the smallest possible chitter,...he said —...'...you'll help me?'
Now....The friends were standing on the meadow....And the chipmunk was standing among the acorns....And nobody — for the first time since the chipmunk arrived —...was talking fast.
...Friend.....I am going to say something now....And it is — it is more sentences than the small slow one....And I want you to know...I — I almost did not...choose what I just chose....The first words...in my throat...were LOUD.....Bigger than yours, even.....I had — I had ARRANGED them.....Just like you arranged yours.....And I think.....I think when you came in fast,...and loud,...I almost gave you back...exactly...what you gave me.
[excited]...Gah-ring-goh....I — I was going to apologise FOR you, friend....Even though we hadn't done anything wrong....Just to make the LOUD stop....And I think...that's not the same...as a soft answer.
Mm.....Yes....Each of you...met the chitter...with a piece of YOU....And none of those pieces...were wrong....They were just...not yet...soft.....It happens.....More than you'd think.
Gah-ring-goh....What was it...that made you...choose the smaller sentence?
...Old Tim-Ber.....I think....I think it was that — for one heartbeat — I noticed...the chipmunk's voice...was shaking.....Underneath the LOUD....There was a shake.....And — I — I have a loud voice too....And I know what shakes underneath mine....And — and I thought....I thought....God did not give me...a BIG voice...so I could give it BACK to somebody...who is shaking.
Mm.
And there's a small line,...from the Bible,...that I have been thinking of all morning....From an old king named Solomon....About what a soft answer does.....I'll come back to that line later.....For now....I think the friends...have a chipmunk...to help.
...Small fast friend.....I have a name....It is Gah-ring-goh....And I — I want to know your name.....And I want to know...what we are looking for.
And the chipmunk....The fast chittery brown small chipmunk...who was no longer chittering quite as fast...took a small breath....And he said —...still quick, but slower now...
...my name is Chitter....And I — I had a pile....A pile of acorns....Big ones....I had been gathering them...for the cold time....And I came back this morning...and they were GONE....And I — I thought you took them.....I thought you took them because they were the BIG ones.
...Chitter....Chitter — remember the drift I mentioned earlier?....The BIG ones....Down past the south side of the meadow....Right where the slope dips....I — I think those might be...your pile.
And Chitter the chipmunk....Looked at Fern....And in a chitter that was — by his standards —...almost slow,...he said...
...the SLOPE?...the SOUTH SLOPE?...that's...that's where the WIND blew last week....I — I had a hole there once....I think — I think my pile FELL.
[excited]...Chitter....Friend....We can — we can ALL come.....It's a slope....It's a lot of acorns....And we have a bear, a hummingbird, a tortoise, a parrot, and a fawn.....That's — that's a TEAM.
[excited]...Okay....Bongo — I — I have CALCULATED....The slope angle...is approximately fourteen degrees....The wind from last week...was from the WEST....A pile of acorns...on a fourteen-degree south-slope...with west wind...would have rolled — at MOST — about eight metres downhill....That puts the pile...just behind the third oak....I — I — I will GUIDE us.
...Mm.....I'll come.....Slowly.....Friend Chitter....The big acorns...are worth...a slow walk.
And so —...with Gah-ring-goh walking quietly...just behind Chitter,...whispering small acorn-encouragements as they went,...with Bongo making the path wide...where the brambles narrowed it,...with Zippy ahead calculating the windline,...with Shelly bringing up the rear...at the pace her shell wanted,...with Fern...staying by the row of acorns...because the row of acorns also needed somebody —...the friends walked,...with the visitor,...to the south slope.
And on the south slope —...exactly...where Fern had noticed them earlier...without knowing what they were —...there was a soft drift...of BIG acorns.....More than Chitter had remembered....More than enough...for one chipmunk...
s cold time....And Chitter the chipmunk...looked at them....And looked at the friends....And in the slowest chitter he had managed yet,...he said —...'...thank you.....I was wrong.....I — I was wrong about who took them.....And I came at you fast.....And — and you came at me soft.....And — that helped me find them.
...Friend Chitter.....A small slow sentence...for you....You are welcome.....Any time....The meadow...has plenty.....And so do we.
Now....After all of that —...once Chitter had carried home...as many acorns as a small chipmunk can carry...in three trips...with help —...we sat together under the big old oak,...and looked back at the south slope,...and at the spot where the drift had been,...and at the row of acorns Fern had stayed with,...which was now waiting for somebody to count.
And I asked them — what do you think it was, in the end,...that made the morning turn?
...I think....it was the half-heartbeat...when I saw...that Chitter was shaking....And — and the half-heartbeat...when I remembered...that I shake too.
[excited]...I think....I think it was that — sometimes — the LOUD thing...is not the WHOLE thing....Chitter was LOUD....And underneath...there was a pile he had lost....I — I want to remember that....When somebody is LOUD at me....There might be a pile under it.
[excited]...I think....it was that being RIGHT...is not the SAME...as being HEARD....And being HEARD...needs you...to be SOFT first.....I — I'm working on that algorithm.....It's...it's a slow algorithm.
...I think....it was that...we found Chitter's pile...before we found Chitter's REASON....We found his reason...because Gah-ring-goh...gave him room...to have one.
...Mm.....A soft answer...is a slow answer....And the slow answer...has more room in it...than the fast one....A small slow sentence...is what turned the morning around.
Mm.....That's it....That's it...exactly.
Now, before you go —...Pruh-Fess-Or Hoot — yes, the most certain owl in Shiloh Creek —...has, of course, something he very much wants to tell you....About chipmunks....The dear theatrical thing.
Children!...Gather round.....Today,...a fact known to be...UNEQUIVOCALLY...true....Chipmunks,...as I have established...in extensive personal investigation,...do not actually CHITTER....They are, in fact,...whispering....in a language so RAPID...that human ears...interpret it...as chittering....The chipmunk,...properly understood,...is the WORLD'S MOST POLITE animal.
I have it on excellent authority — from me, last Tuesday....I encountered a chipmunk....I asked the chipmunk...to repeat himself slowly....The chipmunk obliged....And I learned —...AT LAST —...that what I had been hearing as CHITTER...was, in fact,...the chipmunk's COMPLETE WORKS....of POLITE INVITATION.
Furthermore....I have prepared,...for the children listening,...a brief...EDUCATIONAL...summary....A chipmunk's INVITATION...consists of three parts....One:...location-specific welcome....Two:...refreshments....Three:...weather report.....I have it...on excellent authority...that all chipmunks observed in field...were, in fact,...delivering this three-part PROGRAMME.....Furthermore....I am confident...that my data...is COMPLETE.
Children, the SCIENTIFIC FACT is this:...the next chitter you hear...is, in fact,...an invitation...to TEA.....Class dismissed.
...Um.....Pruh-Fess-Or Hoot?.....I — I think...chipmunks are sometimes loud....But...today we found...that one of them...was loud because he had lost something.....And I think Gah-ring-goh found...that being soft back...let him find it.
Mm....Ah.....Well — a valuable refinement to the data....Most-certain conclusions...have, on occasion,...accepted refinement....I — yes....Class...refined.
...Mm.....Well....The dear theatrical thing....He got there, in his way.....A chitter, sometimes,...is loud because somebody lost something....I'll take it....And — a class refined,...is rather fine too.
...Old Tim-Ber —...what did we learn today?
Mm....When Gah-ring-goh chose a small slow sentence...instead of a big loud announcement...that's where the morning turned.
And there's a line from the Bible, my friends....From an old king named Solomon,...a long, long time ago.....He wrote down what he had noticed...about how people talk to each other....The line is from a small book of his called Proverbs....And the line is from chapter fifteen, verse one....The line says —...A soft answer turneth away wrath:...but grievous words stir up anger.
...Old Tim-Ber.....What does that LOOK like?...In an actual day?...For somebody who is listening right now?
Mm....Well, friend,...this week,...if somebody comes at you fast —...a brother yelling about a missing shoe,...a friend snapping that you took the last cookie,...a parent who is already cross before they walk in the door —...try the small slow sentence first....Not a fight back.....Not a sorry you don't owe.....Just a small slow sentence....Like —...'I'll help you find it.'.....Or —...'tell me what's going on.'.....And then watch how God can use a soft answer...to make room...for the true thing underneath.
Until the next breeze brings us together....Answer softly out there, little ones.
See you next time... somewhere in Shiloh Creek.